# The Make School Vision

Building a blueprint for a new model of higher education.

## Abstract

Make School is redesigning higher education for the 21st century. Our emphasis is on ensuring
relevance of education for the modern economy and accessibility to students of all backgrounds.

We predict a sustainable and scalable model of college can be built upon the following pillars:

- Combining the liberal arts with computing education in a bachelor's granting program
- Providing relevant and engaging education through real-world projects
- Uniting students from a broad socioeconomic range who possess grit (as measured by non-traditional
  metrics) and a passion for impact and innovation
- Ensuring students are the core focus of the institution
- Systemically aligning incentives of the institution with students and providing downside protection via (EIBR) Extended Income Based Repayment

Make School is more than a college. It's an ideology, a movement, and a community. To our students, Make
School provides, above all else, empowerment and belonging.

Our institution is a non-profit focused on serving the following mission:

“To create avenues of upward mobility for students of all backgrounds, empowering such students to
contribute to society through science and technology innovation.”

Our new model of college has enrolled over 300 students, coming from all walks of life and all
corners of the globe. Majority of our students come from low to mid-income families, while nearly
half identify as underrepresented minority students. Our career outcomes are on par with elite
universities, giving us evidence that talent is, in fact, diverse and distributed.

This document is intended to share our vision, our pedagogy, and our learnings to educators,
policymakers, and students. We hope our experiment will inspire innovation throughout the higher
education landscape and accelerate the broader conscious capitalism movement.

## 1. Challenges of higher education

Our world is growing increasingly complex at an increasingly rapid pace. The software revolution is
reshaping the economy, with 50% of existing jobs expected to be replaced by software and automation.
This shift is bifurcating the labor pool. On one side, there exists a huge talent shortage of
technologists. On the other, jobs that have been stable for decades have falling real wages or are
disappearing entirely. Inequality between these groups is rising, and exacerbating systemic racial
inequality driven by unequally distributed education and opportunity.

The traditional education system has been slow to adjust. Elite institutions have increasingly
introduced computing education and modern academic pedagogy, but continue to rely on admissions
criteria that select for students with access to high-quality secondary education and well-educated,
wealthy families. With few exceptions, the majority of higher education institutions have been
chasing status by replicating the model of elite institutions. They attempt to compete for students
by building better facilities and ancillary services rather than investing in improved education and
adapting to the needs of the 21st-century economy. Without the endowments of elite institutions, the
accelerating costs incurred by most institutions over the past decades are presently held in a
combination of student debt and institutional debt. There is as much risk of a wave of university
bankruptcies as there is of a fracture in our financial system caused by a generation overburdened
with unaffordable student loans.

The education system is exacerbating systemic inequality. Low-income students are being told a
four-year degree is their ticket to upward mobility, but the system wasn't designed to fit their
needs and nearly half fail to graduate in 5-6 years. The ones who do remain riddled with debt, which
limits their ability to take risk, pursue their passions, raise families, and ultimately depresses
their long-term earnings potential and well being. Despite the industry being comprised of
predominantly well meaning and good hearted actors, a system designed to fix inequality has started
to function against its aims.

This reality is leaving a generation of students increasingly disenfranchised with traditional
education. Despite all the challenges with higher education, the ROI for the average student remains
positive. The education isn't engaging or relevant enough and the costs are too high, but there
don't exist any viable alternatives. A generation that discovers their passions on Reddit, learns on
Wikipedia, and grows empowered to drive social change on Facebook is begrudgingly pursuing a college
education that fails to respond to their needs because society has left them no choice.

Further reading about the state of higher education:
[make.sc/industry-research](https://make.sc/industry-research)

## 2. Origins of Make School

The first classes at Make School took place 6 years ago at a home in Palo Alto. It was a program
born from the same movement and with the same ideology we hold today, though a vastly different
format. High school students attended Make School for 2 months over the summer in an attempt to
build and launch a product to the app store. Students did not pay for the education, instead they
shared revenues from their product - directly aligning our incentives with theirs.

The desire to build such a program and the educational thesis on which it has been developing were
derived from the lived experiences Jeremy and I had throughout our own education. We were products
of a global progressive education system. We attended Montessori schools, international schools, new
age schools (with no grades or tests), public schools, prep schools, and two of the most
distinguished universities in the world. We studied across 5 countries and 8 cultures before meeting
in computer science class in our Silicon Valley high school.

This foundation of broad-based education combined with an opportune exposure to computing empowered
us to start building software products in high school; iPhone applications which saw commercial and
critical success. Countless hours spent coding, shipping features, reading reviews of happy
customers, and improving their experience made us feel empowered to start solving larger problems
with technology.

Suddenly, our education had a newfound relevance and purpose. Understanding our long-term goals gave
clarity to our short-term focus. Knowing why we were learning showed us what we should be learning.
The act of applying knowledge drove stronger absorption and retention of knowledge. This perspective
has proven to be a core principle of our pedagogy, flipping not just the classroom but the entire
foundation of an education.

This new paradigm of education has amplified relevance in the 21st century. Today, knowledge domains
have grown so specialized and rapidly changing that it's impractical to focus education during early
adulthood and allow that education to serve a lifetime. The model of purpose-driven learning
(learning just ahead of application) has become a necessity. Additionally, the advent of the
internet, modern development frameworks, and robust distribution networks make it possible to apply
knowledge to create real-world impact far earlier during one's education than historically possible.

The dilemma that Jeremy and I faced (now being faced by millions of iGen youth around the world) was
that exposure to this new paradigm made the traditional model of collection driven education
(stockpiling knowledge in hope of future use) feel impractical, unfocused, and disempowering. The
disconnect between our university education and purpose-driven learning left us feeling wholly
disengaged. We spent much of our time in our dorm rooms, diligently absorbing and applying knowledge
and skills we deemed relevant to our long-term ambitions. Eventually, we chose to leave our
respective universities.

Our initiative to build educational programs for our peers was born out of the desire to share this
secret we had discovered. Our summer program was a vehicle to expose our peers to feelings of
passion, purpose, and empowerment, while providing them with practical and employable skills. Though
we initially intended to build a supplement to a traditional education, the sentiment of our
students pushed us to consider designing a new paradigm entirely. Our students told us Make School
was the first time they had felt fully engaged in their education. That they learned more in two
months than in two years of studying computer science in college. That they had finally found a
community to which they belonged.

Our students were the visionaries that inspired us to experiment with building a new model for
higher education. We've spent the last four years learning through application and research in an
attempt to answer two fundamental questions. If we were to go back to college, what would our ideal
experience be? What do we imagine college will look like in 20 years?

## 3. A new model of higher education

The Product University is a moniker for a new model of higher education that stands in contrast to
research universities and liberal arts colleges. Students attend four-year colleges for one of three
primary reasons: to enter academia, to explore the world's knowledge, or to build a foundation for a
successful knowledge economy career. We believe research universities and liberal arts colleges
serve the first and second segments well, respectively. But for career-minded students - a group
that has grown in tandem with the cost of college - there don't exist effective pathways into
knowledge economy jobs.

We hope our experiment can be the foundation of a new kind of university that will co-exist with
existing university models and offer a new option for millions of students who are seeking a roadmap
to the 21st-century economy. This future economy will demand it's workers to be creators, providing
a product or service to help solve a need or develop an enriching experience. Effective creators
won't be silo'd into functional roles, they'll need a broad-based knowledge set and increased
adaptability in order to succeed.

As Product Universities have different goals to existing higher education models, they will be built
on a different foundation than traditional institutions:

Education: The education will blend liberal arts with professional education, combining the best of
a broad-based education with career development courses designed in tandem with industry. A hybrid
campus model will be increasingly used, with students spending 2 intensive years on a physical
campus learning from instructors, peers, and industry mentors, followed by online degree completion
during post-employment terms.

Finances: Extended Income Based Repayment (EIBR) will extend the federal IBR program to all private 
and public student debt. This will allow students to receive the lowest cost of capital financing 
for their education while remaining protected from unaffordable debt burdens if unemployed or
underemployed. EIBR will also create a systemic incentive for the institution to maintain strong 
employment rates as stronger employment means less money is needed to fund EIBR.

Accreditation: Accreditation standards are intended to take efficacy of education and graduate
outcomes into account. Government and student pressures in coming decades will drive shifts towards
improving measurement and increasing importance of these measures. Improved technology platforms
with deeper insights on learner behaviors will allow for competency-based frameworks to be
revisited. Accreditors such as WASC have demonstrated willingness to explore new models of
accreditation, allowing for greater variability in educational models and accelerated innovation.

Product University vision statement from December 2014:
[make.sc/product-university](https://make.sc/product-university)  
Product University in TechCrunch:
[techcrunch.com/2015/07/21/make-university/](https://techcrunch.com/2015/07/21/make-university/)

## 4. Serving an inclusive community of Makers

![Origin of Make School Applicants](https://res.cloudinary.com/makeschool/image/upload/t_fill_780_360/v1/Vision/origin-applicants.png)

Where our applicants come from

Democratizing access to top quality higher education and career pathways is a core focus of our
organization. We offer financial aid through Title IV (protected by EIBR). We seek to create new avenues of upward
mobility for underrepresented populations who are often adverse to traditional debt and unable to
spend 4 years out of the workforce. We hope models like ours can help address systemic inequality as
the economy evolves.

In order to achieve this, we designed our admissions process to consider criteria tangential to
traditional institutions and to serve as a coach rather than a gatekeeper. We do not ask for SAT
scores or GPA (which are heavily correlated to access to high-quality education), instead we seek
proxies to evaluate aptitude for computing and sustained work ethic. Students demonstrate these
traits through computing coursework (either in school or online) and evidence of complex projects,
volunteer work, or employment. Should a student lack suffcient evidence at the time of application,
we ask students to participate in our Ramp program where they work through an online course
supported by weekly group office hours. This allows motivated students to earn admission into our
college and levels the playing field for students who were not afforded mentorship and opportunity
through their secondary education.

Our admissions remains selective, but on a different axis than the criteria of traditional
institutions. Some of our students rank highly on both axis’ and choose Make School over Ivy+
institutions. Others rank highly on our criteria and choose us over state schools or community
colleges. As a result, our student body is far more diverse than Ivy+ institutions with similar
outcomes. 60% of our students are from low to mid-income backgrounds (compared to 10-15% at Ivy+
institutions) while nearly half identify as underrepresented minority students (compared to 15-20%
at Ivy+ institutions). Institutional design (discussed in depth below) needs to be mindful in
supporting a diverse student body with an emphasis on coaching, mentorship, and support outside the
classroom.

The Make School ethos and vision has resonated not only with a socioeconomically diverse population,
but a geographically diverse population as well. Similar to Ivy+ brands, but in contrast to other
institutions, majority of our applicants are from out of state, with 40% from other countries. We're
building a global pipeline of students possessing the Maker ethos through value-driven marketing
initiatives. We provide free online courses, free curriculum for high school classes, and a low-cost
summer program to engage students in our model of education. Early signs point to the development of
a global brand appealing to iGen students who seek progressive education and are passionate about
creating impact through technology.

Student profile of Uchenna Aguocha: [make.sc/uchenna](https://make.sc/uchenna)  
Student profile of Leslie Kim: [make.sc/leslie](https://make.sc/leslie)

## 5. Aims of a Make School education

Designing an effective education requires making choices surrounding the aims and outcomes of the
education. Diversity of institutions is important to create pathways for students with differing
goals. The aims of our education directly map to the wants and needs of our 18-22 year old,
career-oriented, computing focused, maker minded student.

Through our education, we aim to empower our students to grow into leaders and innovators who shape
the future of society. We do so through creating a supportive community of like-minded peers,
coaching students to vision their future, connecting our students to mentors further along their
desired trajectories, and providing an education aligned with student goals.

We define 5 core aims of our education:

Agency: College is a critical time for students to develop into adults with agency of their lives in
both professional and personal contexts. Students learn to live on their own, take care of their
health, budget their finances, prioritize their work, manage their time, communicate effectively,
manage expectations, build habits, and take responsibility for their actions.

Citizenship: In addition to learning to take care of themselves, students develop character
necessary to take care of those around them. Students formalize their ethical frameworks, practice
empathy, understand privilege, respect diversity, reject bias, define consent, volunteer for their
community, engage in local politics, and defend the morals and values they believe in.

Employability: Students develop a computing focused skill set in demand in today's economy, enabling
to take care of their livelihoods and often provide for their families. They are provided
opportunities to apply this skill set to develop a strong portfolio, and experience working in teams
to develop the task management, communication, and professionalism necessary to succeed in a
collaborative workplace.

Foundational knowledge: We seek to equip students with a foundational toolset and knowledge base to
serve a long-term career. This combines soft skills - such as critical thinking, problem solving,
growth mindset - and hard skills - such as computational thinking, modeling, data analysis. Most
fundamental is for students to develop a curiosity to continue learning and developing their minds
throughout their lives.

Impact mindset: Effectively combining citizenship and foundational knowledge can unlock potential of
students to become forces for good in the world. Students are influenced to seek employers solving
problems facing today's society, and challenged to predict problems that will face tomorrow's world.
Students develop a broad knowledge base to understand multi-faceted issues, consider first
principles to identify solutions, and apply systems-level thinking to predict how solutions will
need to adapt to scale.

Student profile of Kenny Batista: [make.sc/kenny](https://make.sc/kenny)  
Call to arms to incoming students:
[make.sc/state-of-the-future](https://make.sc/state-of-the-future)  
Make School graduation and outcomes data: [make.sc/outcomes-data](https://make.sc/outcomes-data)

## 6. Liberal arts, computing, and character

In order to accomplish our aims, we've designed our education on four cornerstones:

Liberal Arts: A broad-based education helps round out students’ worldview and understand the
potential for impact and risks of technology in our rapidly changing society. Students navigate
conversations about gender, race, and ethics currently facing the tech industry. Students take
classes on writing, design, personal finance, and economics to help them develop into a successful
professional and engaged citizen.

Computer Science Theory: Foundations in computer science are critical to understanding how computing
has developed and what the future holds. Through classes on data structures, algorithms, machine
learning and artificial intelligence students build the critical thinking and creative
problem-solving skills necessary to adapt over a long career in the rapidly changing technology
industry. Students develop the ability to architect software to solve complex real-world problems.

Software Development: Practical experience in building and shipping real-world software, using
industry standard tools and collaboration techniques equips students to secure and succeed in their
first job upon graduation. Students choose a technical concentration between mobile and web
development and learn the modern languages and frameworks in demand with employers. Students enter
the workforce knowing how to communicate with stakeholders and design great products.

Character Development: Modern organizations expect people to bring their whole selves to work, so we
expect students to develop their whole self at school. Leaders are defined not by their intelligence
or skill, but by their grit, resilience, courage, empathy, candor and kindness. Students work to
build character through coaching, guest speakers, discussions and group projects designed to help
them understand and navigate personal development and relationships with others.

Make School Course Offerings: [make.sc/course-offerings](https://make.sc/course-offerings)  
Make School Character Development Podcast: [make.sc/podcast](https://make.sc/podcast)

## 7. Progressive education pedagogy

Effective delivery of education is as essential as having relevant objectives and content. The
context and mode in which something is taught will impact absorption and retention of information.
Progressive education pedagogy has been well researched over the past decades, with strong insights
around how to better design a relevant and engaging education. Multidisciplinary projects are more
impactful for students than silo'd subjects, constructionist methods of learning drive stronger
retention, and understanding goals and relevance of content drives motivation. Students are driven
by the same factors as workers in organizations, they need feelings of purpose, autonomy, and
mastery to feel engaged and inspired. This model of learning - paired with high touch instruction
and coaching - has proven to be effective at closing the preparation gap for (often low income)
students entering STEM fields without prior exposure.

We are fortunate to be able to draw on decades of work by researchers and educators who have
theorized and successfully implemented progressive education principles. Although there exist many
individual classes leveraging these principles throughout higher ed, there exist few entire
curricula designed with them in mind. We've adapted these principles to suit our aims and our
demographics in order to design a more relevant, engaging, and inspiring educational experience.

Designing an effective learning experience has strong parallels to the broader study of designing
strong user experiences. This is especially true when serving an “on demand” generation which
prefers pull services (eg. self-driven learning with on-demand access to instructor support) to push
services (eg. traditional lectures). There are 5 core components that compose an effective
education, each an answer to a core usability question:

Where am I? Goal setting helps demonstrate relevance of what students are learning and how it will
support their growth. This is akin to navigation and menus on a website or app.

What should I be doing? Prioritization helps students understand what they should be focused on to
efficiently achieve their goals. This is akin to the blur test on a website or app (ie. which
elements attract your attention to interact with).

What tools do I need? Processes to absorb knowledge equip students with the information needed to
achieve their goals. This is akin to tutorials or tooltips - ideally blended with action.

What action should I take? Opportunities to apply knowledge enable students to make concrete
progress towards their goals. This is akin to taking the core action on a website or app.

Do I feel safe? A key component of effective learning without a strong parallel to digital products
is whether students feel a sense of belonging and security. This support is best provided by
coaching, community building, and support outside the classroom.

The mainstream education model (used by most secondary and post-secondary institutions) prioritizes
absorbing knowledge over contextualizing and applying knowledge. Teachers generally push knowledge
to students through textbooks and lectures.

Goal Setting

Prioritization

Absorbing Knowledge

Applying Knowledge

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Teachers** (via lectures)

**Students** (via homework)

The flipped classroom model broadens the role of teachers to support students in both absorbing and
applying knowledge, increasing emphasis on application. Students absorb knowledge through pre-work
delivered digitally prior to class, while class time is leveraged to discuss content and apply
knowledge through projects and exercises. Students pull support from teachers as needed (and often
in 1:1 settings) as they work through projects.

Goal Setting

Prioritization

Absorbing Knowledge

Applying Knowledge

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Students** (via digital content) **Teachers** (via small group review)

**Students** (via classwork) **Students** (via classroom support)

The progressive education model - used at Make School - further broadens the role of teachers to
encompass goal setting and prioritization, with an emphasis on purpose-driven learning. Instead of
the teacher's role being focused vertically on absorbing knowledge (as in the mainstream model),
teachers provide a horizontal layer of support across all areas. This model requires improved
digital infrastructure, access to coaching and mentorship, and stronger student engagement.
Increased engagement is driven by the improved contextualization and relevance. Teachers work with
students to set macro goals and choose projects that will drive the required learning to achieve
those goals. Students kick off projects in which they will apply knowledge, and in turn are highly
motivated to absorb requisite knowledge to further their projects. Counterintuitively, students are
often exposed to concepts in projects prior to learning the underlying theory, which helps evidence
relevance of concepts.

Goal Setting

Prioritization

Absorbing Knowledge

Applying Knowledge

**Students** (self driven) **Industry Mentors** (via coffee) **Teachers** (via coaching)

**Students** (self driven) **Software** (via task management) **Teachers** (via coaching)

**Students** (via project work) **Peers** (via group work) **Teachers** (via 1:1 project support)

**Students** (via online content) **Peers** (via discussion groups) **Teachers** (via small group
review)

Beyond emphasizing purpose-driven learning, we seek to build contexts that create immediate
real-world relevance for students. Many class projects involve shipping products that students can
use in their daily lives, while others involve contributing to open source projects where their code
will support production software. Students can also work on projects under mentorship of industry
professionals, giving students real end users and a meaningful objective for their work. This has
proven to drive even stronger engagement - especially among diverse student populations - than
existing progressive education environments.

### Curricular Design

Curricular design at Make School begins with well-defined Program Level Objectives (PLOs) that
target the aims of our education. PLOs inform specializations within our degree path (eg. mobile
development, full stack web development, data science, project management) which inform the catalog
of courses offered. We then define Course Level Objectives that target competencies and outline
individual class sessions as part of a syllabus.

Competencies are evaluated primarily through project work, both individual and group projects. The
projects help ensure students apply their learnings and demonstrate evidence of strong absorption of
knowledge and practical skills. Evaluation occurs through holistic rubrics covering competencies of
classes. Rubrics feed into a master student success rubric that covers technical expertise, soft
skills, communication, and job readiness.

The curriculum and rubrics are annually re-evaluated with input from students, instructors, external
educators, and industry executives to ensure cohesiveness and relevance. 20-30% of courses are new
in any given year, while 70-80% of the retained courses go through iteration and improvements during
the year.

Broadly, our educational environment draws more from modern workplaces than classrooms. We rely
heavily on the drivers of motivation that have been researched to inspire knowledge workers:
purpose, autonomy, and mastery. Our evaluation feels more human and practical, similar to
well-constructed performance reviews. On top of a workplace feel, we layer constructionist
educational principles and high touch instruction to ensure students have ample support to grow.
This blend creates a highly supportive environment that serves as a more natural transition between
traditional high school environments students come from and the workplaces they will transition to.
Most importantly, this blend inspires a deep love of learning and creativity that empowers students
to make the most of their education.

Progressive education helps to address inequality:
[https://www.chronicle.com/article...](https://www.chronicle.com/article/Traditional-Teaching-May/243339)  
Software Product Development 1.1 syllabus: [make.sc/spd-syllabus](http://www.make.sc/spd-syllabus)  
Data Science 2.1 syllabus: [make.sc/ds-syllabus](http://www.make.sc/ds-syllabus)  
Job readiness rubric: [make.sc/job-rubric](http://www.make.sc/job-rubric)

## 8. Impact of teachers in a blended classroom

The progressive education model creates great opportunities for technology to augment (rather than
replace) human-centric education. Gains from technology have proved limited over the past decades
through an efficacy focused lens, though technology has substantially changed how students consume
education. Technology, so far, has been used as an add-on to existing classroom experiences rather
than leveraged to rethink how education is delivered. Though video lectures - which students can
watch and rewatch at their own pace - are undoubtedly a large improvement, they still propagate a
largely ineffective educational format.

Technology will undoubtedly be essential in designing future models of education. The challenge lies
in leveraging a blend of technology and humans to scale high-quality education. Large lecture
halls - and now video lectures - have served as an effective way to scale mainstream education, but
progressive education requires teachers to do far more than delivering content. So how can we
effectively scale teachers?

We should start by examining what the role of a teacher is in progressive education. Being a teacher
requires nearly as broad of a skillset as being an entrepreneur. Teachers build content, manage
dozens of people, review documents, complete administrative tasks, and more. We categorized the key
aspects of an instructors job at Make School and found 16 categories:

**Building new curriculum**

**Iterating on existing curriculum**

**Constructing projects**

**Evaluating projects**

**One-to-many content delivery**

**One-to-one topic clarifications**

**One-to-one problem solving**

**One-to-one office hours**

**Goal setting and prioritization**

**Performance interventions\***

**Admin, scheduling and reporting**

**Misc tasks**

\* applies to learners who are speeding ahead as well as falling behind

This breakdown provides us with a better understanding of the challenges of scale. Aspects of this
role are rote (thus automate-able), others are standard across cohorts (thus centralize-able), while
a core subset is deeply human and personal. The human and personal elements are the teaching
equivalent of the “last mile”. While pure software driven education can drive 80% of the education,
the remaining 20% - which typically is the highest leverage learning - is immensely difficult for
software to solve. Thus teachers can act as that last mile support, investing their time in
one-to-one and high leverage interactions with students. We see 4 key categories that fit into the
last mile of our education:

1.  Iterating on curriculum to meet the needs of a specific class based on student feedback
2.  Clarifying understanding of topics in one-to-one settings
3.  Problem-solving support for students’ custom projects in one-to-one settings
4.  Performance interventions to uplift struggling students, or further challenge accelerated
    students

**Building new curriculum** **Dedicated curriculum team**

**Iterating on existing curriculum**

**Constructing projects** **Dedicated curriculum team**

**Evaluating projects** **Automate**

**One-to-many content delivery** **Deliver digitally**

**One-to-one topic clarifications**

**One-to-one problem solving**

**One-to-one office hours** **Leverage mentor network**

**Goal setting and prioritization** **Digital learner tools**

**Performance interventions**

**Admin, scheduling and reporting** **Automate**

**Misc tasks**

This model of education ensures a human-centric and deeply personal experience. The efficiency gains
from our technology infrastructure will be focused around project evaluation, administrative work,
and supplementing human coaching with a learner dashboard that helps contextualize current work and
priorities into a long-term goal oriented roadmap.

In addition to leveraging technology, building a robust teaching corps is essential to scaling
high-quality progressive education. We anticipate hiring a diverse group of curriculum architects
and developers, and instructors of varying experience levels. We’re investing greatly in teacher
training and professional development to support our teaching corps. This investment will help us
ensure excellence in hiring, developing, and retaining high-quality teaching talent.

Looking forward, we’ll continue to experiment with modern software and tools - such as interactive
learning environments - to further integrate technology as a cornerstone of the classroom
experience. We view blended learning as a classroom experience redesigned from the ground up, with
software and teachers respectively solving problems they are best suited for.

Make School instructor rubric: [make.sc/instructor-rubric](http://www.make.sc/instructor-rubric)  
Make School lesson preparation guide: [make.sc/lesson-prep](http://www.make.sc/lesson-prep)  
Sample of Make School digital content: [make.sc/web-dev](http://www.make.sc/web-dev)  
Sample of Make School interactive coding tutorial: [make.sc/code](http://www.make.sc/code)

## 9. Developing the complete human

Experiences outside the classroom are as vital to students’ development as the education inside it.
College is often the first time people live away from home, make lifelong friends of different
backgrounds, learn time management, challenge their viewpoints, and develop character. The
construction of university environments enable these learnings, though few institutions do so with
deep thought and intention. We see great opportunity to improve upon the existing model of human
development in hopes of developing our students into successful adults and engaged citizens. In the
near term, we are focused on the following areas:

Consent culture: Issues around sexual harassment and assault are rampant across college campuses and
the tech industry, and deeply important to fix to ensure gender equality. Cultural norms and media
propagate an unhealthy culture around dating and sex, especially when involving substances. We hold
a responsibility to our students to ensure a safe environment for all genders. We are approaching
this through a combination of preventative education around these issues, endorsement of consent
culture, and systems for reporting. We don’t feel Title IX regulations do a good enough job of
preventing incidents or educating students. We plan to share educational content we develop to help
other institutions reshape culture around consent.

Mental health: Today’s youth are experiencing greater mental health challenges. These challenges
often correlate with inconsistent or poor academic performance and are often stigmatized. We
integrate workshops around mental health into our education aiming to reduce stigma and introduce
toolsets to help students manage their psychology. Our coaching program helps identify and support
students going through internal challenges. We offer heavily subsidized mental health and therapy
consultations - which nearly one-third of our students take advantage of - in addition to escalation
paths for severe issues

Character development: We’ve deeply integrated character development into our education to better
prepare students for their careers and broader lives. Students learn about professionalism,
thoughtful communication, empathy, willpower, mindfulness and honesty. Students are encouraged to
practice skills through interacting with their peers and the broader community. We hope to build a
community where people share their stories, feel less alone, plan personal-growth actions and hold
each other accountable.

Diversity, inclusion, and community: Our students come from all around the US (soon all around the
world) and from all walks of life. Ensuring a culture that promotes diversity and is inclusive of
all backgrounds and ways of thinking is essential to building a creative and safe environment where
students can grow. We establish cultural norms and emphasize these values during orientation and
recurrently throughout the year. We help students understand their biases and emphasize the mission
and values that unite us all.

Student life in an urban campus: We’re building our campus to be integrated into San Francisco, a
city in the midst of a modern renaissance. San Francisco has been leading both a software-driven
economic revolution and a counter-culture driven social revolution over the past decades. The cities
booming growth is not without challenges, rising inequality, exorbitant cost of living, and growing
segregation. We feel such an environment - rather than a discrete campus - is ripe for learning how
to be an engaged citizen. Students commute through the city from their dorms to our school, finding
opportunities to engage with the surrounding community. Students have access to tech industry
events, academic lectures, and arts & culture shows that take place every night across the city.
Students will take classes on politics and ethics, helping them understand their place in a larger
ecosystem. We plan to increase expectations for students to be civically engaged, through volunteer
opportunities and by building software to help power civic initiatives run by city government and
local organizations.

Make School Character Development Podcast: [make.sc/podcast](http://www.make.sc/podcast)  
Make School Code of Conduct: [make.sc/code-of-conduct](http://www.make.sc/code-of-conduct)  
Make School Harassment Policy: [make.sc/harassment-policy](http://www.make.sc/harassment-policy)

## 10. Long-term career coaching

A college degree is considered to be helpful throughout one’s career. Specifically, the general
education, the institution’s brand to attract employers, and the alumni network to discover
opportunities. However, in a rapidly changing economy where skills are increasingly valued over
network, institutions need to look to expand their career support during a student’s education and
throughout their lives.

At Make School, career support begins with coaching and mentorship. Students meet with their coach
twice monthly to discuss their long-term goals and are guided through an academic plan designed to
support their trajectory. We seek input from our industry partners to determine which courses to
recommend students based on their desired career path. Industry mentors regularly visit our campus
and give students feedback on projects and guidance on how to best leverage their time both inside
and outside the classroom.

Students are continuously evaluated by their coaches against our job readiness rubric, a summary of
their proficiency in theoretical foundations, applied knowledge, communication, and soft skills.
Once a student demonstrates sufficient progress, they activate our career services. Students
participate in workshops to practice job interviews, prepare their portfolio and resume, and
negotiate offers. Coaches actively manage a student’s search for internships and jobs, while also
facilitating introductions for students to companies that match their goals. Once students are
placed into internships and jobs, we check in with students to ensure their onboarding is smooth and
the environment is a strong fit for them. Students frequently enter jobs with substantially faster
ramp-up times than typical new grads, and often receive promotions within their first year of work.

We aim to further support alumni beyond their first job. Our professional network, coaches, and
mentors remain available to alumni as they apply for their second and third jobs. We frequently
advise alumni who are founding their own companies, and help introduce them into founder and
investor networks.

This year, we are beginning to experiment with providing evening courses and online content to
alumni who want to continue their education once in the workplace. In the longer term, we may
consider offering part-time certificate or degree programs designed specifically for alumni
interested in moving into different domains or accelerating their career trajectories. Opportunities
for lifelong learning are critical for sustained career success and should be the responsibility of
post-secondary institutions to provide.

Coaching rubric: [make.sc/coaching](http://www.make.sc/coaching)  
Outcomes support: [make.sc/outcomes](http://www.make.sc/outcomes)  
Mentorship program: [make.sc/mentor](http://www.make.sc/mentor)

## 11. Systemic encoding of principles

As we’ve spent more time speaking with leaders of higher ed institutions, we’ve noticed many of our
viewpoints feel far less radical than they did just a few years ago. The modern crop of university
presidents feels well tuned to the challenges facing higher education. The difficulty for them lies
in driving systemic change in their institutions to address these challenges.

Our uniqueness today is not in our vision of what a new model of higher education looks like, but in
our nimbleness, our ability to execute on our vision, and our opportunity to design an institution
on these principles from the ground up.

Principles of organizations are often threatened as organizations scale. The challenges arise when
two principles conflict, when new leaders join the organization, and when resources (both time and
money) are stretched thin.

To help address these challenges, we are aiming to build our organization with only two primary
principles. Secondary principles exist, though they are explicitly subordinate to the two primary
ones.

1.  Students first
2.  A principle is only a principle if there exists a system to enforce it

The first is self-evident, one would be hard pressed to find an institution that did not consider
this a key principle. Yet institutions regularly sacrifice this principle. The importance of the
second meta-principle is to ensure institutional values are upheld. Creating systems to ensure
values-driven decision making will help address the core threats to organizational principles that
occur with scale. Systems can implicitly prioritize values and provide decision making support to
overworked team members and new hires.

A few examples of systemic principles at Make School:

EIBR: Offering downside protection for student debt in form of Extended Income Based Repayment 
directly ties Make School’s financial incentives to student success. Our institutional focus 
is forced on outcomes rather than inputs as better outcomes will lead to less money spent on EIBR. 
This incentive also drives us to hold a tight feedback loop with industry and ensure our education 
stays relevant to the needs of the 21st-century economy.

Student Satisfaction: One of our key organizational metrics - which we use to define success of our
leadership - is a measure of student satisfaction. Expecting leadership to report on this metric
monthly ensures we collect monthly student feedback, swiftly address student concerns, and
frequently iterate on our courses.

Compensation Equation: We define faculty and staff salaries based on a consistent salary equation
based on skill and effectiveness. The equation limits negotiations, ensures fair compensation across
the organization, reduces competitiveness, and increases trust and transparency. It protects our
values of equity and diversity as we give managers systemic way to avoid implicit bias and ensure
equal pay across demographics.

We believe thoughtful design of the systems that power our institution is key to building a
values-driven organization and ensuring quality at scale. In designing these systems, we must build
integrated relationships between the (often disjoint) functions of academics, finances, operational
metrics, and digital tools. We need to allow new information and ideas to challenge and change
existing systems to enable innovation and experimentation. We must establish protocols to make risk
and failure acceptable, and allow graceful recovery. If designed well, these systems can help ensure
sustainability and relevance of our institution over hundreds of years.

## 12. Proving scale and efficacy

The early results of our experiment have so far supported our hypotheses. Our outcomes are on par
with top universities, our students are engaged and inspired in the classroom, our alumni are
excelling in the workforce, and we are creating upward mobility for a diverse student body.

The next phase of our experiment will be more challenging than the first. Over the course of the
next 5 years we are seeking answers to a series of questions:

Can we maintain quality? As we expand our student body to that of a mid-size private university,
we’ll face new challenges with our systems of student support, instructor hiring and training, and
career support, among others. Ensuring our education is a deeply personal and personalized
experience will grow harder with scale. We must thoughtfully design systems to help uphold our
values and ensure strong outcomes as we scale to a larger urban campus in San Francisco, and perhaps
new cities.

Can we achieve long-term fiscal sustainability? With exception of a small handful of private
universities with near billion dollar endowments, most universities face challenging financial
predicaments. Non-profit funding can be impacted by macroeconomic cycles.

How will alumni careers develop? Our education has proven to result in strong outcomes, with a near
6 figure average starting salary. Top students have also been selected to join highly exclusive
teams at top companies and moved into management roles at fast-growing startups. Long-term career
success usually depends more on communication skills, rigorous professional development, and
risk-taking rather than technical skills and starting salary. We plan to continually support alumni
careers to ensure their careers continue to develop in an accelerated fashion.

Can we prove efficacy? Most research evaluating efficacy of top institutions has shown their success
is largely around selection bias rather than quality of education. Our outcomes have proven to be on
par with top institutions while drawing from a much broader socioeconomic range of students. We want
to go deeper to prove efficacy, both for individual courses and for career outcomes. We’re looking
to develop stronger evidence that the classes we teach truly meet our course level and program level
objectives. We also plan to use doppelgänger studies to compare career of our students to those of
similar profiles studying at other institutions.

Can we remain adaptive? The challenges faced by universities today are primarily due to the
difficulty of directing a large organization to reinvent itself to the needs of modern students and
employers. Though our education is suitable for today’s environment, we must assume that it won’t be
suitable for tomorrow’s. We should look to design systems that inspire innovation and allow our
education and institution to adapt to the psychology of future generations and the skills relevant
to the future economy. Our feedback loops with industry and our own students will be essential to
ensuring our institution can keep up with large-scale economic and societal shifts.

Survey of college presidents on fiscal sustainability -
[www.insidehighered.com/news/...](https://www.insidehighered.com/news/survey/survey-college-presidents-finds-worry-about-public-attitudes-confidence-finances)  
Data on efficacy of Ivy League institutions -
[www.nber.org/papers/w7322](https://www.nber.org/papers/w7322)

## 13. Enabling innovation through higher education

We hope our impact can extend further than the students who walk through our doors. Our students
represent a small fraction of the hundreds of millions of students who seek higher education around
the world every year. We cannot serve every student, nor will our model of education work for every
student. We can, however, promote progressive education and emphasis on student outcomes to our
peers.

This document is our first attempt to share our philosophy and pedagogy, a practice we’ll continue
through publishing white papers, blog posts, and research. We hope our learnings can extend, be
adapted, and inspire more experiments within higher ed. We want to serve as a beacon of innovation,
constantly questioning the status quo and challenging the boundaries of what it means to be an
accredited institution.

Our impact will be more wholly realized if there soon exist more Product Universities, adaptations
of our model to radically different yet in-demand disciplines, and more models of higher ed that
look nothing like ours but are equally radical.

In addition to thought leadership, we plan to open source much of our content and software to better
enable others to implement our innovations. We also hope to partner with colleges and universities -
as we are with Dominican University of California - to provide a subset of our courses as a computer
science minor on their campus to equip them to prepare students for the 21st-century economy.

## 14. 5-10 year vision

The final sections of this document should be considered as a thought experiment rather than a
thesis. It is impractical to predict so far into the future for a young organization, though an
attempt to do so may providing insight into how it might develop, and at the least the broad
direction we are aiming to grow.

One of the underlying predictions behind our work at Make School - and interest in inspiring a new
category of institutions - is that the economy is being largely reshaped by the software revolution.
The gains of technology - and the real world possibilities created - have made many well-developed
business models obsolete. We’re entering a world where large corporations (largely funded by a
recent boom in venture capital) are being born within a decade by providing higher quality at a
lower cost to consumers. These businesses - if designed ethically - have potential to create equity
and improve quality of life globally.

We see Make School, and institutions like us, creating a robust talent pipeline for this new genre
of organization. These organizations require a new mold of worker: self-driven, autonomous,
passionate, vulnerable, empathetic, and ethical. Work is not a means to an end but a purpose,
colleagues are not acquaintances but a community. Our aim is to develop and support a generation of
talent to found and join organizations building a better and more equitable future.

Over the next decade, we expect to expand our courses of study beyond computer science, to computing
adjacent fields where new products and services are being born. We’ll look to introduce
specializations in design and human-computer interaction, robotics, cognition and artificial
intelligence, biotech, and more. We hope to build out an urban campus in San Francisco, before
expanding to New York City, and additional economic hubs around the world, allowing students to
study across locations.

We’d want systems and software to loosely govern our network of campuses, ensuring enough agency for
individual instructors and administrators to experiment with new models of education and new
curricula to better support local students and industry. We expect our instructors to maintain heavy
industry ties, some as adjuncts and some serving a multi-year “tour of duty” prior to taking the
next step in their professional careers or founding their next startup. Our students will contribute
to open source projects under the guidance of industry professionals, ensuring relevance of their
education and enabling their work to create value for the world.

## 15. 20 year vision

Our hope for Make School in the long term is to inspire a movement beyond the confines and structure
of a specific mold of institution. At the core, Make School is about empowerment and belonging. A
community that attracts like-minded individuals and gives them the knowledge and agency to tackle
the biggest problems in the world.

The characteristics that constitute the largest companies in the world and the top universities in
the world have heavy overlap. They unite large numbers of talented individuals under a shared
purpose and leverage this potential energy to drive innovation and economic advancement. They create
cultural norms, suggest ethical frameworks, and promote creative activity.

We hope to expand our ecosystem of education and innovation through various structures: our college,
open source curriculum for high schools, powering courses at other universities, continuing
education for our alumni, professional development within organizations, startup incubation, and
more.

We hope our community embodies a progressive value set, challenges it’s own beliefs, and strives to
uplift those around us. We seek to create equity and drive economic advancement globally. We hope
our community is continually inspired to make, and that together we can reach billions of lives.
