---
title: Challenges of higher education
slug: 'challenges-of-higher-education'
contentType: 'TextContent'
---

## 1. Challenges of higher education

Our world is growing increasingly complex at an increasingly rapid pace. The software revolution is
reshaping the economy, with 50% of existing jobs expected to be replaced by software and automation.
This shift is bifurcating the labor pool. On one side, there exists a huge talent shortage of
technologists. On the other, jobs that have been stable for decades have falling real wages or are
disappearing entirely. Inequality between these groups is rising, and exacerbating systemic racial
inequality driven by unequally distributed education and opportunity.

The traditional education system has been slow to adjust. Elite institutions have increasingly
introduced computing education and modern academic pedagogy, but continue to rely on admissions
criteria that select for students with access to high-quality secondary education and well-educated,
wealthy families. With few exceptions, the majority of higher education institutions have been
chasing status by replicating the model of elite institutions. They attempt to compete for students
by building better facilities and ancillary services rather than investing in improved education and
adapting to the needs of the 21st-century economy. Without the endowments of elite institutions, the
accelerating costs incurred by most institutions over the past decades are presently held in a
combination of student debt and institutional debt. There is as much risk of a wave of university
bankruptcies as there is of a fracture in our financial system caused by a generation overburdened
with unaffordable student loans.

The education system is exacerbating systemic inequality. Low-income students are being told a
four-year degree is their ticket to upward mobility, but the system wasn't designed to fit their
needs and nearly half fail to graduate in 5-6 years. The ones who do remain riddled with debt, which
limits their ability to take risk, pursue their passions, raise families, and ultimately depresses
their long-term earnings potential and well being. Despite the industry being comprised of
predominantly well meaning and good hearted actors, a system designed to fix inequality has started
to function against its aims.

This reality is leaving a generation of students increasingly disenfranchised with traditional
education. Despite all the challenges with higher education, the ROI for the average student remains
positive. The education isn't engaging or relevant enough and the costs are too high, but there
don't exist any viable alternatives. A generation that discovers their passions on Reddit, learns on
Wikipedia, and grows empowered to drive social change on Facebook is begrudgingly pursuing a college
education that fails to respond to their needs because society has left them no choice.

Further reading about the state of higher education:
[make.sc/industry-research](https://make.sc/industry-research)
