---
title: Progressive education pedagogy
slug: 'progressive-education-pedagogy'
contentType: 'TextContent'
---

## 7. Progressive education pedagogy

Effective delivery of education is as essential as having relevant objectives and content. The
context and mode in which something is taught will impact absorption and retention of information.
Progressive education pedagogy has been well researched over the past decades, with strong insights
around how to better design a relevant and engaging education. Multidisciplinary projects are more
impactful for students than silo'd subjects, constructionist methods of learning drive stronger
retention, and understanding goals and relevance of content drives motivation. Students are driven
by the same factors as workers in organizations, they need feelings of purpose, autonomy, and
mastery to feel engaged and inspired. This model of learning - paired with high touch instruction
and coaching - has proven to be effective at closing the preparation gap for (often low income)
students entering STEM fields without prior exposure.

We are fortunate to be able to draw on decades of work by researchers and educators who have
theorized and successfully implemented progressive education principles. Although there exist many
individual classes leveraging these principles throughout higher ed, there exist few entire
curricula designed with them in mind. We've adapted these principles to suit our aims and our
demographics in order to design a more relevant, engaging, and inspiring educational experience.

Designing an effective learning experience has strong parallels to the broader study of designing
strong user experiences. This is especially true when serving an “on demand” generation which
prefers pull services (eg. self-driven learning with on-demand access to instructor support) to push
services (eg. traditional lectures). There are 5 core components that compose an effective
education, each an answer to a core usability question:

Where am I? Goal setting helps demonstrate relevance of what students are learning and how it will
support their growth. This is akin to navigation and menus on a website or app.

What should I be doing? Prioritization helps students understand what they should be focused on to
efficiently achieve their goals. This is akin to the blur test on a website or app (ie. which
elements attract your attention to interact with).

What tools do I need? Processes to absorb knowledge equip students with the information needed to
achieve their goals. This is akin to tutorials or tooltips - ideally blended with action.

What action should I take? Opportunities to apply knowledge enable students to make concrete
progress towards their goals. This is akin to taking the core action on a website or app.

Do I feel safe? A key component of effective learning without a strong parallel to digital products
is whether students feel a sense of belonging and security. This support is best provided by
coaching, community building, and support outside the classroom.

The mainstream education model (used by most secondary and post-secondary institutions) prioritizes
absorbing knowledge over contextualizing and applying knowledge. Teachers generally push knowledge
to students through textbooks and lectures.

Goal Setting

Prioritization

Absorbing Knowledge

Applying Knowledge

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Teachers** (via lectures)

**Students** (via homework)

The flipped classroom model broadens the role of teachers to support students in both absorbing and
applying knowledge, increasing emphasis on application. Students absorb knowledge through pre-work
delivered digitally prior to class, while class time is leveraged to discuss content and apply
knowledge through projects and exercises. Students pull support from teachers as needed (and often
in 1:1 settings) as they work through projects.

Goal Setting

Prioritization

Absorbing Knowledge

Applying Knowledge

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Students** (self driven) **Parents + Counselors** (if available)

**Students** (via digital content) **Teachers** (via small group review)

**Students** (via classwork) **Students** (via classroom support)

The progressive education model - used at Make School - further broadens the role of teachers to
encompass goal setting and prioritization, with an emphasis on purpose-driven learning. Instead of
the teacher's role being focused vertically on absorbing knowledge (as in the mainstream model),
teachers provide a horizontal layer of support across all areas. This model requires improved
digital infrastructure, access to coaching and mentorship, and stronger student engagement.
Increased engagement is driven by the improved contextualization and relevance. Teachers work with
students to set macro goals and choose projects that will drive the required learning to achieve
those goals. Students kick off projects in which they will apply knowledge, and in turn are highly
motivated to absorb requisite knowledge to further their projects. Counterintuitively, students are
often exposed to concepts in projects prior to learning the underlying theory, which helps evidence
relevance of concepts.

Goal Setting

Prioritization

Absorbing Knowledge

Applying Knowledge

**Students** (self driven) **Industry Mentors** (via coffee) **Teachers** (via coaching)

**Students** (self driven) **Software** (via task management) **Teachers** (via coaching)

**Students** (via project work) **Peers** (via group work) **Teachers** (via 1:1 project support)

**Students** (via online content) **Peers** (via discussion groups) **Teachers** (via small group
review)

Beyond emphasizing purpose-driven learning, we seek to build contexts that create immediate
real-world relevance for students. Many class projects involve shipping products that students can
use in their daily lives, while others involve contributing to open source projects where their code
will support production software. Students can also work on projects under mentorship of industry
professionals, giving students real end users and a meaningful objective for their work. This has
proven to drive even stronger engagement - especially among diverse student populations - than
existing progressive education environments.

## Curricular Design

Curricular design at Make School begins with well-defined Program Level Objectives (PLOs) that
target the aims of our education. PLOs inform specializations within our degree path (eg. mobile
development, full stack web development, data science, project management) which inform the catalog
of courses offered. We then define Course Level Objectives that target competencies and outline
individual class sessions as part of a syllabus.

Competencies are evaluated primarily through project work, both individual and group projects. The
projects help ensure students apply their learnings and demonstrate evidence of strong absorption of
knowledge and practical skills. Evaluation occurs through holistic rubrics covering competencies of
classes. Rubrics feed into a master student success rubric that covers technical expertise, soft
skills, communication, and job readiness.

The curriculum and rubrics are annually re-evaluated with input from students, instructors, external
educators, and industry executives to ensure cohesiveness and relevance. 20-30% of courses are new
in any given year, while 70-80% of the retained courses go through iteration and improvements during
the year.

Broadly, our educational environment draws more from modern workplaces than classrooms. We rely
heavily on the drivers of motivation that have been researched to inspire knowledge workers:
purpose, autonomy, and mastery. Our evaluation feels more human and practical, similar to
well-constructed performance reviews. On top of a workplace feel, we layer constructionist
educational principles and high touch instruction to ensure students have ample support to grow.
This blend creates a highly supportive environment that serves as a more natural transition between
traditional high school environments students come from and the workplaces they will transition to.
Most importantly, this blend inspires a deep love of learning and creativity that empowers students
to make the most of their education.

Progressive education helps to address inequality:
[https://www.chronicle.com/article...](https://www.chronicle.com/article/Traditional-Teaching-May/243339)  
Software Product Development 1.1 syllabus: [make.sc/spd-syllabus](http://www.make.sc/spd-syllabus)  
Data Science 2.1 syllabus: [make.sc/ds-syllabus](http://www.make.sc/ds-syllabus)  
Job readiness rubric: [make.sc/job-rubric](http://www.make.sc/job-rubric)
