---
title: Origins of Make School
slug: 'origins-of-make-school'
contentType: 'TextContent'
---

## 2. Origins of Make School

The first classes at Make School took place 6 years ago at a home in Palo Alto. It was a program
born from the same movement and with the same ideology we hold today, though a vastly different
format. High school students attended Make School for 2 months over the summer in an attempt to
build and launch a product to the app store. Students did not pay for the education, instead they
shared revenues from their product - directly aligning our incentives with theirs.

The desire to build such a program and the educational thesis on which it has been developing were
derived from the lived experiences Jeremy and I had throughout our own education. We were products
of a global progressive education system. We attended Montessori schools, international schools, new
age schools (with no grades or tests), public schools, prep schools, and two of the most
distinguished universities in the world. We studied across 5 countries and 8 cultures before meeting
in computer science class in our Silicon Valley high school.

This foundation of broad-based education combined with an opportune exposure to computing empowered
us to start building software products in high school; iPhone applications which saw commercial and
critical success. Countless hours spent coding, shipping features, reading reviews of happy
customers, and improving their experience made us feel empowered to start solving larger problems
with technology.

Suddenly, our education had a newfound relevance and purpose. Understanding our long-term goals gave
clarity to our short-term focus. Knowing why we were learning showed us what we should be learning.
The act of applying knowledge drove stronger absorption and retention of knowledge. This perspective
has proven to be a core principle of our pedagogy, flipping not just the classroom but the entire
foundation of an education.

This new paradigm of education has amplified relevance in the 21st century. Today, knowledge domains
have grown so specialized and rapidly changing that it's impractical to focus education during early
adulthood and allow that education to serve a lifetime. The model of purpose-driven learning
(learning just ahead of application) has become a necessity. Additionally, the advent of the
internet, modern development frameworks, and robust distribution networks make it possible to apply
knowledge to create real-world impact far earlier during one's education than historically possible.

The dilemma that Jeremy and I faced (now being faced by millions of iGen youth around the world) was
that exposure to this new paradigm made the traditional model of collection driven education
(stockpiling knowledge in hope of future use) feel impractical, unfocused, and disempowering. The
disconnect between our university education and purpose-driven learning left us feeling wholly
disengaged. We spent much of our time in our dorm rooms, diligently absorbing and applying knowledge
and skills we deemed relevant to our long-term ambitions. Eventually, we chose to leave our
respective universities.

Our initiative to build educational programs for our peers was born out of the desire to share this
secret we had discovered. Our summer program was a vehicle to expose our peers to feelings of
passion, purpose, and empowerment, while providing them with practical and employable skills. Though
we initially intended to build a supplement to a traditional education, the sentiment of our
students pushed us to consider designing a new paradigm entirely. Our students told us Make School
was the first time they had felt fully engaged in their education. That they learned more in two
months than in two years of studying computer science in college. That they had finally found a
community to which they belonged.

Our students were the visionaries that inspired us to experiment with building a new model for
higher education. We've spent the last four years learning through application and research in an
attempt to answer two fundamental questions. If we were to go back to college, what would our ideal
experience be? What do we imagine college will look like in 20 years?
