---
title: 'A new model of higher education'
slug: 'a-new-model-of-higher-education'
contentType: 'TextContent'
---

## 3. A new model of higher education

The Product University is a moniker for a new model of higher education that stands in contrast to
research universities and liberal arts colleges. Students attend four-year colleges for one of three
primary reasons: to enter academia, to explore the world's knowledge, or to build a foundation for a
successful knowledge economy career. We believe research universities and liberal arts colleges
serve the first and second segments well, respectively. But for career-minded students - a group
that has grown in tandem with the cost of college - there don't exist effective pathways into
knowledge economy jobs.

We hope our experiment can be the foundation of a new kind of university that will co-exist with
existing university models and offer a new option for millions of students who are seeking a roadmap
to the 21st-century economy. This future economy will demand it's workers to be creators, providing
a product or service to help solve a need or develop an enriching experience. Effective creators
won't be silo'd into functional roles, they'll need a broad-based knowledge set and increased
adaptability in order to succeed.

As Product Universities have different goals to existing higher education models, they will be built
on a different foundation than traditional institutions:

Education: The education will blend liberal arts with professional education, combining the best of
a broad-based education with career development courses designed in tandem with industry. A hybrid
campus model will be increasingly used, with students spending 2 intensive years on a physical
campus learning from instructors, peers, and industry mentors, followed by online degree completion
during post-employment terms.

Finances: Extended Income Based Repayment (EIBR) will extend the federal IBR program to all private
and public student debt. This will allow students to receive the lowest cost of capital financing
for their education while remaining protected from unaffordable debt burdens if unemployed or
underemployed. EIBR will also create a systemic incentive for the institution to maintain strong
employment rates as stronger employment means less money is needed to fund EIBR.

Accreditation: Accreditation standards are intended to take efficacy of education and graduate
outcomes into account. Government and student pressures in coming decades will drive shifts towards
improving measurement and increasing importance of these measures. Improved technology platforms
with deeper insights on learner behaviors will allow for competency-based frameworks to be
revisited. Accreditors such as WASC have demonstrated willingness to explore new models of
accreditation, allowing for greater variability in educational models and accelerated innovation.

Product University vision statement from December 2014:
[make.sc/product-university](https://make.sc/product-university)

Product University in TechCrunch:
[techcrunch.com/2015/07/21/make-university/](https://techcrunch.com/2015/07/21/make-university/)
